Our military forces are committed to peace.
We have chosen peace.
Our wish, our prayer, is for peace.
We yearn for peace.
We pray for peace.
For thousands
of years, humans have tried
to find peace
—peace as individuals,
peace as families,
peace for the entire human race.
We want to lay the foundation of peace
for generations to come.
We want to do the hard work now
so our children and our grandchildren
can grow up in a peaceful world.
The future we want:
opportunity and security for our families,
a rising standard of living,
a sustainable, peaceful planet for our kids
—all that is within our reach.
Yet, despite humans’ best efforts,
peace
has been elusive.
For millenniums,
rulers and governments
have tried to achieve peace
through treaties,
resolutions,
summits
and, ironically, war.
Our peace as humans
is more fragile than ever.
Man’s efforts to bring about lasting peace
have failed time and time again.
This isn’t surprising to us.
Jeremiah 10:23 tells us:
“It does not belong to man . . .
to direct his step.”
Humans were simply not designed
to rule themselves.
Good health, safety, overall well-being
—these are becoming harder to find
as we move further into what the Bible
refers to as “the last days.”
As long as human rule continues,
disunity will continue.
It’s true that global peace
cannot be obtained by human efforts alone.
But those who are close to God
can find peace of mind right now.
Isaiah 48:17, 18 says:
“I, Jehovah, am your God,
“the One teaching you to benefit yourself,
“the One guiding you
“in the way you should walk.
“If only you would pay attention
“to my commandments!
“Then your peace
would become just like a river.”
It’s only Jehovah
who has the ability to guide humans
to real, lasting peace.
He promises he will bring this about.
Until this happens,
Jehovah continues to provide ways
for us to experience peace now.
How does he do that?
By giving us “the peace of God
that surpasses all understanding.”
We aren’t the only ones
whose peace has been challenged.
God’s Word is filled
with accounts of faithful servants
whose peace was challenged
by the dominating forces of their day.
As we study and meditate on these accounts,
the lessons we learn from them
help us to trust in Jehovah
as he guides us to peace.
Understanding how these accounts
relate to Jehovah’s purpose to bring peace
by means of his Messianic Kingdom
gives us confidence
that his purpose never fails
and he will support
and guide us on into the future.
One of Jehovah’s prophets
who learned this lesson firsthand was Jonah.
Jonah lived in the ninth century B.C.E.
Jehovah assigned Jonah to go to Nineveh,
a city of the Assyrian Empire.
Based on what he knew about Nineveh,
Jonah considered this to be
an intimidating and threatening assignment.
The Assyrians were known as fierce warriors,
and Nineveh itself was later described
as a “city of bloodshed.”
So you can understand Jonah’s trepidation
when Jehovah asks him
to proclaim a judgment message
against this imposing city
and its pagan inhabitants.
In an attempt to find peace,
Jonah decides to go far away from Nineveh
and boards a boat headed for Tarshish.
Tarshish is generally associated
with modern-day Spain.
So from Israel,
this is the complete opposite direction
of Nineveh.
Jonah found anything but peace.
Look!
By the gods.
Furl the sail!
Now, this was no ordinary storm.
It was so severe that the ship
was in danger of being wrecked.
Captain, we’re taking on too much water!
This storm is from the gods!
Baal!
Eshmun!
The crew cried out to their gods,
but Jonah knew the true Source of the storm.
And now he accepts
personal responsibility for the situation.
Lift me up
and throw me into the sea,
and the sea will calm down for you;
for I know that it’s because of me
that this violent storm has come upon you.
Can you imagine the courage it took
for Jonah to make this request?
He had no way of knowing
if Jehovah would save him,
but he did not want others
to perish on his account.
In his mercy, Jehovah spares Jonah’s life.
How am I still alive?
What will become of me?
When faced
with a difficult assignment,
Jonah “got up to run away from Jehovah
to Tarshish.”
Jonah’s conscience had to bother him;
he had to be questioning his decision.
He tried to take matters into his own hands,
tried to find his own peace.
Where does he find himself?
In the belly of a fish!
Yet he calls to Jehovah
in a moment of despair.
O Jehovah,
out of the depths of the Grave,
I cry to you for help.
Please hear my voice.
What I have vowed, I will pay.
Jonah could have reasoned
that this was the end
of his assignment as Jehovah’s prophet.
After all, he did disobey direction.
So likely, he was surprised
to hear the word of Jehovah come to him
a second time.
Jonah!
Get up,
go to Nineveh the great city,
and proclaim to her
the message that I tell you.
Yes.
Thank you.
At first, Jonah trusted in himself
and didn’t understand
that Jehovah would protect him
from the violent Assyrians.
But after being given
a second chance, what happens?
Well, then he puts aside
his human concerns
and looks to Jehovah for protection.
In just 40 days more,
Nineveh will be overthrown.
Jehovah, the true God, has spoken.
This city will be destroyed.
Nineveh will be overthrown.
The true God will overthrow Nineveh.
The true God has spoken.
Eventually, the king himself repents
and orders everyone
in Nineveh to do the same.
Jonah learned a valuable lesson
from this experience.
By originally running away from Nineveh,
he chose to trust in himself
rather than putting his trust in Jehovah.
Are you Jonah?
I am.
Mommy says you saved us.
No, Jehovah saved you.
I was just—I was just a messenger.
Jonah learned
that without a doubt
Jehovah protects those
who trust and obey Him.
If Jehovah has asked you to do something,
if he’s asked me to do something,
if he’s leading us,
he absolutely will guide us through it.
Jonah’s account proves this.
Although the Ninevites were spared
because they repented (that’s true),
Assyria later
returned to its evil, wicked ways.
About a century
after Jonah’s judgment message,
King Sennacherib of Assyria brought
his armies against the cities of Judah,
including the city he wanted most
—Jerusalem.
King Hezekiah of Judah
was an outstanding king
who “held fast to Jehovah.”
From the beginning of his reign,
he proved to be zealous for true worship
not only in Judah but in all of Israel.
Hezekiah had done so much
to stand up for pure worship,
yet now he is faced with the prospect
of a siege against Jerusalem
by Sennacherib’s armies.
Hezekiah agrees to pay Sennacherib
a tribute in return for peace.
Yet, the armies continue their conquests,
as Sennacherib and his men besiege
the strongly fortified city of Lachish.
From here,
Sennacherib sends a part of his army
as well as military chiefs to Jerusalem
in an attempt to demand surrender.
The spokesman for the group was the Rabshakeh,
who spoke Hebrew fluently.
He loudly ridiculed Hezekiah
and taunted Jehovah,
boasting that Jehovah
was no match against King Sennacherib.
Imagine what these soldiers
must have been thinking.
Sennacherib’s armies were on a warpath,
taking city after city.
To Hezekiah, this was a defining moment.
He had to decide if he would trust in himself
or trust in Jehovah.
My brothers,
we must remember that Jehovah
is fully able to rescue us,
just as he has in times past.
God’s Word . . .
King Hezekiah,
will you not even now face the facts?
We are trapped!
The Assyrians are at our gate,
and you cling to the belief
that nothing bad will happen.
You will destroy everything
you so hope to preserve
—the temple, Jerusalem,
our very lives.
Shebna, I am not blind
to the dangers that we face.
I too am afraid.
But if Jehovah
allows Jerusalem to fall,
so be it.
How can we give up what belongs to Jehovah?
So as a man of faith,
Hezekiah focused on Jehovah’s ability
to save His people
despite Sennacherib’s
continued advances toward Jerusalem.
I’m curious about this king of yours.
Who does he think
will come to save him from me?
Jehovah, your God,
is weak!
He will cringe before my god Asshur.
Hezekiah remained
determined to trust in Jehovah.
This decision required
a tremendous amount of faith,
especially with more than
185,000 Assyrian soldiers
headed toward Jerusalem.
Instead of trusting in himself,
he continued to look
for Jehovah as the Source of true peace
even as an attack seemed imminent.
And Jehovah again
showed just how insignificant
human rulers are in comparison to him.
Hezekiah learned
that when a way out seems impossible,
trusting in Jehovah always leads to success.
Jehovah rewarded that trust
with victory over the Assyrians.
This is a lesson
we can apply now and in the near future.
There may be situations
when true worshippers seem trapped,
but never forget
that Jehovah is all-powerful.
He’s leading his people,
and we can follow
his guidance with full confidence.
Jehovah will protect those
who trust in him at Armageddon.
Jerusalem remained safe
against attack for the time being,
but peaceful conditions didn’t last long.
Hezekiah’s son Manasseh
did what was detestable
in the eyes of Jehovah.
He brought back Baal worship
and personally took its vilest practices
to extremes,
even putting a carved image of a false god
right inside Jehovah’s temple.
So here you have a king
who’s supposed to be protecting
the people from idolatrous influence
doing the exact opposite
—building altars to false gods.
He even went so far
as to pass his own sons through the fire,
sacrificing them to these gods.
The peace with God that Hezekiah
worked so hard to achieve for the nation
is now reversed by the actions of his son.
Because of this,
Jehovah punished Manasseh severely.
He allowed the king of Assyria
to take him captive to Babylon.
While in captivity,
Manasseh ultimately repented.
He humbled himself,
and he stayed faithful
right to the end of his life.
Grandfather!
We can imagine him impressing
the importance of faithfulness
to Jehovah on his young grandson Josiah.
Listen to me.
Jehovah is holy,
and you must serve him
the way he wants us to.
All other gods
are powerless.
Yet, in spite of all this,
the people still thought
that they could serve Jehovah and Baal.
So after becoming king,
Josiah started a campaign against idolatry.
I’ve seen these cheaper.
Take it or leave it.
We start here!
No!
This is what we will do to every false god in the land.
He tore down altars used for false worship,
sacred poles, images, and statues.
He was intent
on cleansing the land of idolatry.
Now, he showed remarkable courage
to stand up for true worship
at a time when few were doing so.
There’s no doubt this was a difficult task.
At times, he may have even wondered
if he was doing the right thing.
It’s possible Jehovah provided Josiah
with assurance from the prophet Jeremiah.
This is what Jehovah says: “Look!
“A son named Josiah
“will be born to the house of David!
“He will sacrifice on you
“the priests of the high places,
“those making sacrificial smoke on you,
and he will burn human bones on you.”
That prophecy
made over 300 years earlier confirmed
that Josiah was the one
prophesied to act against false worship.
This may have given Josiah
even greater incentive and courage
to continue his campaign,
which now included repairing the temple.
These actions contributed
to the peaceful conditions
that elevated pure worship.
Josiah did so much
to restore pure worship.
That is why we love him.
Yet, the peoples’ heart condition
remained polluted,
so the nation required severe discipline.
Jeremiah prophesied
a conquest of the Babylonians
against Judah.
All this land
will be reduced to ruins,
and this land and its inhabitants
will have to serve the king of Babylon
for 70 years.
Daniel himself may have heard
Jeremiah speak those words.
And he certainly
saw it come true as he and his family
were exiled to Babylon.
Talk about peace being interrupted!
Daniel was a young Judean prince taken
from his homeland
and separated from his family.
But being chosen to receive special training
in the court of King Nebuchadnezzar
presented another set of challenges.
The entire way
of Babylonian life was contrary
to what Daniel knew growing up in Judah.
But Daniel was determined
not to pollute himself
with foods Jehovah would not approve of.
And Jehovah blessed
Daniel’s determination to be faithful,
as he was selected to serve
as one of King Nebuchadnezzar’s wise men.
Nebuchadnezzar was a warrior-king
intent on building a great empire.
After he officially
took the throne
in 624 B.C.E., his domain
grew with each conquest.
Babylon became an epicenter
of trade and commerce.
Nebuchadnezzar undertook
huge building projects throughout the city,
which made the city seem impregnable.
Imagine the sense of security
the inhabitants of Babylon must have felt,
locked safely behind the city’s walls.
Nebuchadnezzar
attributed the prosperity
and security all around him
to the power of his false gods.
The chief of these false gods
was Marduk, the god of war.
Yet, these false gods and their priests
would prove to be worthless.
One night,
King Nebuchadnezzar had a strange dream.
Call the wise men!
O king, may you live on forever.
Relate the dream to your servants.
We will tell the interpretation.
No!
If you don’t make the dream known to me
along with the interpretation,
you’ll be dismembered,
and your houses will be turned into public latrines.
There is not a man on earth
who can do what the king demands.
What the king is asking is difficult.
No one exists
who could tell this to the king except
—except the gods.
Seize them!
Kill them!
Jerah.
You’re in danger.
Why? What happened?
I didn’t hear everything,
but the wise men angered the king.
Everyone is to be executed by dawn.
Bring Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah here.
I’ll try to learn more.
This edict to kill all the wise men
would also include Daniel and his companions.
So let’s look at this
from Daniel’s perspective.
Here he is, a young man in a foreign land,
serving in the court of one
of the most powerful and violent men alive.
And that man is now demanding
that someone, in effect, read his mind:
“Tell me my dream,
and tell me what it means.”
O king,
interpretations belong to my God, Jehovah.
He knows your dream and what it means.
Well, where is your God?
Where?
I believe that he—
I know that he will reveal it to me.
Please, give me time.
Daniel is not acting
on previous experience.
He hasn’t received interpretations
of dreams from Jehovah.
Instead, he is acting on faith
—faith that he had learned
by studying the sacred books of his time.
These books
likely included the inspired writings
of Moses, David, Solomon, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, and other prophets.
Oh, we can only imagine
Daniel poring over these scrolls,
opening up his heart to Jehovah,
begging Jehovah to give him wisdom and understanding.
He loved it.
There’s no doubt that
as Daniel studied these accounts,
his faith was strengthened
and his bond with Jehovah drew even closer.
So even though Daniel knew nothing
of King Nebuchadnezzar’s dream,
he was fully convinced
that Jehovah would reveal the dream
and its interpretation
and prove to be Daniel’s salvation.
Do we know exactly which accounts
Daniel was able to draw from at this time?
It’s impossible to say for a certainty,
but we do know he had access to “the books.”
He references the prophecies of Jeremiah.
Daniel could see how Jehovah blessed
faithful, obedient men in the past.
So by asking Nebuchadnezzar for time,
he wasn’t looking to buy himself
another day of life;
he was allowing Jehovah to reward his faith
by revealing the dream to him.
Daniel strikes a balance here.
Although he is confident
that Jehovah will reveal the dream to him,
he isn’t casual in the way
he handled the situation.
He did what any God-fearing man
would do here.
He approached Jehovah in prayer.
O Jehovah,
surely you didn’t bring us here just to die.
What will people say?
We told them
that you are the God of the heavens,
the only God who can reveal secrets.
Please, vindicate yourself.
I have found a man from the exiles of Judah
who can make known
the interpretation to the king.
I know who he is.
Can you really make known to me
the dream that I saw
and its interpretation?
There is a God in the heavens
who is a Revealer of secrets,
and he has made known to King Nebuchadnezzar
what is to happen
in the final part of the days.
This is your dream:
You saw an immense image.
That image
was standing in front of you.
You yourself are the head of gold.
But after you another kingdom will rise,
inferior to you.
Then another kingdom, a third one, of copper,
that will rule over the whole earth.
As for the fourth kingdom,
it will be strong like iron.
The kingdom will be divided.
And as the toes of the feet
were partly of iron and partly of clay,
so the kingdom will be partly strong
and partly fragile.
This took a tremendous amount of faith
and courage on the part of Daniel.
Now, we may find our peace threatened,
our very lives might be on the line.
In that moment, we can turn
to Jehovah God in prayer,
opening up our hearts,
confident that he will support us.
Like both Daniel and Jonah,
we’ve been given an assignment
to proclaim a message.
This requires courage to speak out boldly
concerning Jehovah’s judgments
against those who oppose his sovereignty.
Both of these prophets are excellent examples
of Jehovah backing those who trust in him.
Jehovah will always be with us
as long as we have faith in him.
When we face situations that seem impossible,
as in the case with Hezekiah,
we have the ability to tap
into the most powerful force there is!
As this system comes to a close,
we will find ourselves in situations
that test our courage and threaten our peace.
We will have to stand up
for pure worship
just like Josiah, and this will be unpopular.
But with Jehovah on our side,
we can face those situations with confidence.
He’s all-powerful,
and he’s going to help us through it.
Now, here’s the interesting thing:
Some of the prophecies that Daniel recorded
applied not only to the future
of the Babylonian Empire
but also outline world events
to our day and beyond.
And these events are being fulfilled
right before our very eyes!